Good day I'm Norman Wildbergers today we're
going to start having a look at this important
but somewhat delicate notion of a sequence what
do we mean in mathematics by as sequence of course
in daily life this is a familiar word a sequence
of events in our day for example we might get up
brush our teeth get dressed have breakfast read
the paper catch the bus start work and so on so
a definition of it in English might be that
it's a following of one thing after another
that's one internet definition here's another
one a particular order in which related things
follow another so we have this intuitive English
idea from daily life we want to now transfer that
to concise clear mathematics so in mathematics
the term sequence is related to a bunch of other
concepts which are closely connected overlapping
perhaps sometimes these are notions of a list a
set or maybe a multiset a vector poly number
ordered set matrix function relation there's
some kind of similarity between all of these these
are all attempt to try to organize mathematical
objects not just single mathematical objects but
a number of mathematical objects into some kind
of larger coherent entity which we can then
manipulate as a new mathematical object it's
very natural and useful thing to be able to do
nevertheless it can be somewhat problematic to
do this clearly in the math foundations 42
lecture I talked about the difficulties in
defining precisely what we mean by a function
and the difficulties that that are there are
also in evidence for a lot of these other concepts
including the idea of a sequence will see that in
particular there is a big divide between dealing
with so called finite sequences and so-called
infinite sequences these are parallel but they're
quite a different kettle of fish and we have to
approach things delicately we have to be prepared
to think quite differently about finite sequences
and infinite sequences so today we're going to
start with finite sequences to focus the ideas
with sequences let's at first at least start
with the simplest perhaps most natural kinds
of sequences in mathematics which are sequences of
natural numbers so for example here's a sequence 1
2 3 4 5 consists of 5 natural numbers in a certain
order and we can see that they're separated by
commas here's another sequence called tea sequence
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 here's another sequence you ten
nine eight seven six five four three two one so
these are sequences that are finite there's only a
certain number of them and then the sequence ends
however we often want to deal with sequences which
go on which carry on according to some pattern for
example here's a sequence let's call it V 1 2 2 3
3 3 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 and then it carries on in some
fashion or another and the three dots represent
this idea that it carries on but the three dots
really don't tell us what the pattern is although
you're probably pretty confident that you you can
guess what the pattern is because there seems to
be something going on here here's another very
familiar sequence 2 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 and so on
which you will all recognize as the sequence
of prime numbers or at least it appears to be
the sequence of prime numbers okay so there's
a big division between these finite sequences
these first three and these two sequences here
which are not finite they kind of carry on or at
least we're pretending that they are carrying on
by putting three dots so what exactly is going on
here what exactly we're talking about this has to
be clarified but clearly it's easier to at least
start with finite sequences so let's have a look
at finite sequences of natural numbers and we're
gonna do that in slow stages when steps starting
with very simple idea about one sequence so a one
sequence of natural numbers is just a natural
number and k plus 1 sequence is an expression
of the form s sub K comma N where S sub K is
a KC qin s' and N is a natural number in other
words what we're doing is we're defining first of
all a 1 sequence and then a 2 sequence and then a
3 sequence and then a 4 sequence and so on and
what we're saying here is that for example a 2
sequence is what you get when you start with a
1 sequence and add a comma and another natural
number 3 sequence is something that you get when
you start with a 2 sequence add a comma and then
another natural number in fact for any k a k plus
1 sequence is obtained by adding a comma and one
more natural number to a k sequence so this
is an inductive definition of sequences in the
sense that we're defining them sort of one step
at a time this makes a reasonably clear how to
to build them up starting from the simplest such
sequences which are just natural having done that
we can now define a sequence s of natural numbers
to be a KC Qin sub natural numbers for some K a
natural number the number K is the length of the
sequence and we'll use this notation so now we're
including all the different KC Qin tsa's for K
equals 1 K equals 2 K equals 3 and so on into
this broader type of just a sequence or a natural
number sequence if you like we might introduce a
new type for that kind of thing NAT sequence for
a natural number sequence so for example s equals
3 that's a 1 sequence so it's a sequence and its
length is 1 T equals 4 for 27 it's a 3 sequence
it's like this 3 u equals 5 3 2 1 is a 4 sequence
its length is 4 these are all examples of natural
number sequences so the reason why we didn't
proceed and say sequence is just a bunch of a
natural number is put together separated by commas
it's because we have to use this word bunch of or
some equivalent word which essentially means the
same thing as sequence so we could say a sequence
is a list of numbers separated by commas or a
sequence is a succession of numbers separated
by commas or we could try to use some other word
but ultimately we're just replacing one word with
another one which is pretty well equivalent to
it it's a little bit circular so by doing this
inductive definition approach it's a little bit
clear that we're just building up sequences as
objects created from smaller sequences by adding
commas and more natural numbers let's actually
introduce a closely related but slightly different
notion the idea of a list so I'll list L and we're
gonna be sticking with natural numbers for now
so a list of natural numbers is a sequence s of
natural numbers enclosed in square brackets so
we're gonna make the convention that if we take
a sequence and we put it in square brackets like
here or here then we get a list so a list is just
a sequence enclosed in square brackets so we'll
call this thing on one list because it's got one
element and we'll call this a three list because
it's got three elet's the advantage in doing that
is that the brackets make it clear where the list
starts and stops we have a sequence like this on
the page it might be a little bit unclear where
the sequence stops and where the next sequence
begins for example those are the way of just
being more precise about the boundaries of the
object it's very clear now that this is a separate
mathematical object that we can manipulate as a
separate entity all right so that's that's could
be our convention a list is a sequence enclosed in
square brackets now we're to use the same notation
for the length of a list as we do for the length
of a sequence let's talk a little bit about the
important idea of a specification of a sequence
we've talked a little bit about specification and
definitions in math foundations 44 so you might
have a look at that again to remind you we said
that a specification of a mathematical object is
really the information required to determine a
particular mathematical object and it's useful
to think about how we specify sequences so here is
a sequence three five seven it has three elements
in it it's a sequence of length three and here
I have shown you the actual elements separated
by commas and we can check that this sequence
which is a three sequence really does fulfill
the requirements of the definition because it's
a two sequence followed by a comma and a natural
number and why is this a two sequence it's a two
sequence because this is a one sequence followed
by a comma and a natural number and why is this a
one sequence it's a one sequence because it is a
natural number so this is exactly what we mean by
a three sequence and this is the full or the true
specification of that sequence we are listing all
of the elements in the right order now the same
sequence can also be described in some alternate
ways in fact in many many alternate ways here
are some of them we could say that s is the first
three odd Prime's in increasing order that's true
these are the first three odd primes and we've
written them in the increasing order another
thing we could say is that s is the first three
odd numbers odd numbers bigger than one also an
increasing order yes these are the first three odd
numbers bigger than one in increasing order or we
could say that this is also the sequence of the
first three odd Mersenne exponents what does that
mean well that refers to a prime P that has the
property that two to the P minus 1 is also prime
these kind of primes are called Mersenne Prime's
and a prime P that has the property that two to
the P minus one is prime is may be called AB merce
an exponent so 3 is a Mersenne exponent because
3 to the P minus 1 is 7 which is prime 5 is a
Mersenne exponent because 2 to the fifth minus 1
is 31 which is prime and 7a is a Mersenne exponent
because two to the seventh minus one is a hundred
and twenty-seven which is also prime so here we
have three different ways of describing the same
sequence but each of these is more indirect than
the actual specification these are in my view more
like descriptions rather than specifications
they are written in English language and with
a certain amount of knowledge or a certain
amount of effort they can be translated back
into the true specification but often some work
may have to be done to do that so I want to make
a distinction here I want to make a distinction
between the actual specification of the sequence
by listing the elements one by one separated
by commas and this more vague flexible idea of
giving some kind of description of the sequence
now this last description is quite interesting
let me tell you how it carries on so this is
actually sequence a 0 0 0 0 43 in Neal Sloan's
famous online encyclopedia of integer sequences
so here's the little bit more of this sequence of
odd Mersenne exponents 3 5 7 13 17 19 30 161
81 107 these are all prime numbers that have
the property that two to the P minus 1 is also
prime so since we're gonna be talking a little
bit about sequence as I'm going to have some more
to say about this this very lovely resource and
I recommend that you have a look at it ok easy
to find on the internet online encyclopedia of
integer sequences which has many many beautiful
sequences tens of thousands of lovely sequences
and they've sort of been catalogued by Neil Sloan
and given names and given nice descriptions and
they're often many different ways of thinking
about a given a sequence so the point here is that
we want to distinguish between the actual idea of
specifying the sequence by listing the elements
and some secondary description that may or may not
easily be converted into the true specification
this is a very crucial idea that manifests itself
in in a number of ways in mathematics so this is
a foundational series in mathematics here we're
trying to layout mathematics clearly and precisely
we're also trying to come to grips with the
weaknesses of modern mathematics of which there
are quite a lot and here's a very very interesting
and important point so the idea is that a sequence
is truly specified only by listing each and
every one of its elements one by one in order
because this corresponds to the actual definition
of what we mean by a sequence and up to now we're
only talking about finite sequences so to try to
make that clear let's have a look at this example
let's say that s is the sequence of prime numbers
between a million and a million and 50 in order
now this kind of statement is often used in modern
mathematics to to define some mathematical object
but I think we need to be a little bit skeptical
about accepting this without some some thought
this is actually not a sequence as its presented
it's rather a description of a sequence you do
not have the sequence until you actually see
the elements so here's a mantra that you might
keep in mind sort of frame it on your wall show
me the elements well here are the elements so
I've done some work I've gone to my computer and
I've gone through these 50 numbers and I figured
out which ones actually are prime and here are
the primes between a million and a million and
fifty a million and three is prime a million
and 33 is prime a million and 37 is prime and
a million and 39 is prime and if I didn't make
any mistake there are no other Prime's in that
interval so here is the sequence s now it's
written out explicitly now we have actually
fulfilled the requirements of the definition
we can say this is a true specification of a
sequence this well this is in my view not
a specification of a sequence is a more
a description of a sequence so this illustrates
the difference between a specification like this
and a description like this the specification is
precise and fulfills exactly the requirements of
the definition while a description has a certain
vagueness to it or may have a certain vagueness
to it there's rather a range of possibilities
for a description description might be very
very clear or it might be very very unclear
maybe very easy to come up with the sequence
from a description it may be very very hard
to come up with a sequence from the descript
specifications versus description there's a
big conceptual difference between these two
and I want you to keep this in mind let's have a
look at another example here is another sequence
which has the same form as the previous example
the sequence of all prime numbers between 10 to
the 10 to the sixth and 10 to the 10 to the 6th
plus 50 to the 6 now it's the same kind of form
it says that the numbers are bigger than they were
in the previous example so we're supposed to take
these Prime's and put them in order and that's
a sequence but this is a blueSky definition so
this is a very challenging to find all the prime
numbers in this range and very possibly maybe we
will never know if there are any such Prime's
depends on how big our computing facilities
get so is this our definition is this really
a specification or are we just talking about
some fairytale object here this is the kind of
question that should pop into your mind when you
see a definition like this a so-called definition
or specification here's another example consider
the sequence of integers from 1 up to 10 to the
9th or a billion all right well this is a pretty
explicit sequence 1 2 3 4 5 6 and so on up to 1
billion a billion is a big number but it's not a
number that we don't deal with in economics and so
on so is this a sequence is this a specification
of a sequence how about all the elements in this
sequence well clearly I haven't because instead
of the numbers seven eight nine and up to the one
less than this I've substituted these three little
dots so I've clearly left out something but on the
other hand what I've left out is pretty clear we
all could at least make an attempt at filling
these things in it might take us some years to
do so so my feeling about this is well it's it's
borderline this is pretty decent specification
but you could make some objection to this as a
specification of a sequence that becomes clearer
when we up the ante a little bit here's a similar
kind of thing the sequence of integers now from N
equals 1 up to 10 to the 10 to the 9 not 10 to the
9 but 10 to the 10 to the 9 that's so much bigger
than 10 to the 9 there's no hope of being able
to list all these numbers in a real sequence it's
absolutely impossible with with current technology
and even technology in the next few thousands of
years but still it's something very unambiguous
about what this sequence is well we think it's
reasonably unambiguous but maybe if we actually
had to think about it we might be a little bit
not so sure because these numbers are starting to
get pretty big and if we up the ante even more if
we go from 1 up to 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the
9 which is vastly bigger than this one then our
dismay ought to increase a little bit we ought to
becoming more and more nervous about claims about
all the numbers between 1 and this number here
probably the universe has a has a hard time try to
fit all these numbers into it does it make sense
to talk about a sequence if there's not enough
room in the universe to actually write it down
even theoretically we're starting to get to some
philosophical one hand clapping kind of questions
here and basically I'm not really interested in
having philosophical questions in mathematics so I
think we need to treat such objects with some some
err we need to have some respect for very very
big numbers and we're gonna be talking more about
very very big numbers much bigger than these ones
in future videos in this lecture we've only been
talking about sequences of natural numbers but of
course we can easily extend this to sequences of
other kinds of things like rational numbers which
is particularly interesting for us when we're
doing analysis so a sequence of rational numbers
can be defined in a similar kind of way first we
can define what we mean by a sequence of rational
numbers starting with K equals 1 then K equals
2 then K equals 3 and so on inductively so for
example this would be a for sequence of rational
numbers 3 halves comma minus 1/2 comma 0 comma 4/3
and then we could define a sequence of rational
numbers just to be a k sequence for some natural
number K all right so such finite sequences
whether they're natural numbers or rational
numbers are are interesting but ultimately we
want to go further what we really would like to do
is to consider infinite sequences because most of
the sequences that sort of naturally pop up have
this unending aspect they don't just carry on and
stop they want to keep going and we want to study
these kinds of things in mathematics the question
is how are we going to do that how are we going
to have a logical clear approach to things that
go on and on forever like for example the the
basic sequence of natural numbers 1 2 3 4 5 6 so
next time for example we are going to be looking
at some infinite sequences for example this one
a 40 and Sloan's encyclopedia which is familiar I
hope and it seems to carry on but actually doesn't
keep on going forever it's a bit of a question
maybe it's a semi philosophical question but
we're gonna have a little think about about that
kind of issue next time so infinite sequences how
do we approach them I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening